The next Sort that I wanna talk about
with you is one called Radix Sort.
Sometimes this is called Bucket Sort,
though actually technically Bucket Sort is
something different,
but it's very similar.
In any case, this is something
called a non-comparison sort,
in that you'd never
actually directly compare
numbers to each other use
a method called bucketing.
And you can see kind of see that
happening here, it's really strange.
So you can't even really measure it with
big O in the sense that, it's not gonna
be N squared, or anything like that,
it's actually going to be I think, MK?
[LAUGH] But
we'll get into that here in just a second.
So yeah it's a non-comparison sorting.
We do something by actually
comparing different number of places
instead of comparing numbers directly.
And I'll get into that
here in just a second.
So we're gonna sort parts
of the array first, right?
So let's take a look at this array
that I have here in my notes 109, 224,
901 and 58.
So the first thing that you're
gonna do is you're actually
going to sort it by the ones first.
So 9, 4, 1, 8.
So you can see here, after the first pass,
we have 901, 224, 58 and 129, right?
So you can see it's actually
sorted by the ones place.
Then we're going to sort it again but
by the tens place, right?
So after the second round,
we have 901, 109,
224 and 58, then we're gonna sort
of one more time by the hundreds.
So at this point we'll have 058, right?
000 here, 109, 224 and 901.
And you can see after having done that,
sorting it by the hundreds
place which is the largest place that
there is we end up having a sorted array.
Kind of a mind bending way of sorting.
It's not something that a human would
ever kind of think of directly.
So you can kind of see
that happening here.
It'll sort them into buckets by zeros,
ones, twos, threes and
fours, and you do it for
however many places there are.
So in this particular case,
there's up to 1000.
So we do that sort four different times.
Makes sense?
Sort of?
So, again, what's the big O of this?
The big O of this is gonna be
a little bit different than we're
used to because we have to account for
this how many buckets or
how many times we have to do the sorting,
right?
So we're gonna call that term k or
w in this case, let's just go with k.
And instead of being On squared,
you end up being which is n times n,
you end up being n times k.
So it's kind of n squared
in the sense that it's two
different terms multiplied to each other.
So you might ask me,
is this better than n log n?
Well, as you may have guessed being this
fun of the course, it depends, right?
It depends on what the distribution
of your numbers are, right?
So if you have a lot of very long numbers
that are distributed really well, right?
So there's like kind of a uniform
distribution with lots of terms, right?
So if you have, hundreds of 1000s that
are distributed across that entire range,
then radix sort actually ends
up being a pretty good sort.
But if you're sorting 500 numbers and
they're all between 0 and 100,
it tends to be kind of inefficient and
you'd be better off with something like
quick-sort or something like that.
So, spatial complexity n being n plus k,
where n is the length and
k is how many places there are to sort by.
So it's not great on spatial complexity
because you have to do a lot of bucketing.
So that's why it's only favorite
employees specific circumstances.
But I wanted to show you how
you can sort things without
actually ever directly comparing numbers,
right?
So like in this case,
109 is actually never directly
compared to like 901, right?
The only thing they're ever compared
by is just by these buckets.
So I'm gonna give you a chance to try and
code this up.
I'm gonna help you kinda get started here.
That's fine.
And actually, I'll just come back to here.
That was quick-sort.
Let's get into radix sort.
Okay, so you can see here,
these are all the numbers that
you're going to be sorting by.
And if you wanna just do something for
fun here, you can actually do this.
It'll just sort 99 very long numbers for
you.
So you can see how efficient
this actually can be.
But this is kind of
extra credit down here.
Let's focus on this one up here.
Okay, so we're gonna do a radix sort here.
So, I'm gonna just advise
you on some helper
functions I think you should code for
yourself.
One should be function getDigit.
We give it a number, a place,
and the longest number.
So for example,
if I put into let's say I have a number
like 1391, so that would be the number.
And I give it a place of 0
cuz I want the 0 with place.
And I have the longest number in here.
It's like, correct my doing got to
make sure I'm doing this right way.
And then the longest number in here.
So the longest number would
be like the longest number in
your particular set rise.
So if I had a number like 30,000 in
my set, or let's even look at this,
the longest number in this
set is of length 4, right?
So 3000, 1244, so the longest number
in that particular case would be 4.
Actually is there.
And 4 in this getDigit
that should return here.
The one right?
Number equals that place equals that and
longest number equals 4
Sorry, I'm just making sure
that I get this correct.
Anyway, this getDigit helper
here is gonna help you here.
So that you can just provide
these numbers here so
that it helps you with the bucket sorting.
Then I would also just write
a function called get longest number?
A lot of times you'll know this
going into your data set, right?
You'll know that the longest
stuff will be of length 4,
length 5, or length 6 or
something like that.
But in this particular case,
I will just provide that here,
get longest number And
in this particular case,
get longest member if you call it on
this data set, it would return 4, right?
Right, the reason why you need longest
number here, that's what I was trying to
remember is, let's say the longest
number in your data set is 3000 but
you give it number 3, right?
So the longest number here is gonna,
or so not the longest number, but
the place will be 4 on that.
So you'll actually get back to 0,
does that makes sense?
Okay, and then let's go into
what radix sorting is gonna do.
So find the longest number
Create how many buckets you need.
In our case, since we're doing base 10
math, this will be an array of arrays.
Right and then you'll have a bucket for
0123456789.
Okay, then here you'll have a for loop For
how many iterations you need to do.
So that will be based on
the longest number, right?
Because you need to do one iteration for
each of the longest numbers.
And then basically what you do is you
gonna throw them in the buckets and
then you're gonna dequeue them
back out into your final results.
And you'll keep doing that back and forth
until you end up with the correct answer.
So inside that for loop you'll have
Nq, which is the word for
just like throwing something
into an array the numbers
into their buckets.
This will probably be a while loop.
That's why I have that.
And then here we're gonna have another for
Loop, For
each bucket where you
dequeue all of the results.
That's more or less kinda step-by-step
what you're going to be doing.
I kinda diagram this modality because it's
kinda an abstract one to think about.
But the idea again,
let's just go back to our visual
here to kind of just
take this step by step.
So notice for each one of these,
it's enqueuing them I
just make that bigger.
There we go.
First by the 0's, right?
0's, 1's, 2's, 3's, 7's, right?
You can see the highlighted in red of
the one that it's enqueuing at the moment.
Then, what it does notice,
it just dequeues them out in order, right?
So, all the 0's are coming out,
all the 1's are coming out.
And so after the first iteration
we have this array that's
sorted by the 1's places, right?
And then it does it again, notice that
the red ones are now the 10's, right?
So now we're sorting by the 10's place.
And that goes back into these buckets.
Notice that nothing's ever
being compared to each other.
We're never asking,
is this bigger than this?
We're just putting in,
into the buckets and
then back out into
the general results already.
Okay, so this gets put back into
these buckets by the 10s place.
Notice that 1and 7 are in the 0,
right because they have no 10s place.
And then these just get
dequeued out again.
And now notice that it's sorted by
the 10s and the 1s place right so
1, 7, 10 20, 21, 20, 22, 27, 30,
38, 43, 77, 80, 82, 93, 99.
And then we do it again for the hundreds.
And then notice that it's
sorted now by the hundreds.
Right, notice that 793 is
the last one in here now.
Whereas one is still the first one,
and then you do it one more time for
the 1,000s place.
And then you dequeue all that back,
and there you go.
Now everything is sorted without ever
asking is this bigger than this?
There's no If statements in there,
it's just putting things in in and
out of buckets.